---
layout: post
title: How the Tambroni government was brought down
tags: pol en
original: tambroni-government
---
These days mark the fiftieth anniversary of the tumultuous and bloody events of 1960, when Italy saw an attempt at a sharp authoritarian turn under the DC government of Fernando Tambroni, which enjoyed the support of the neo-fascists of the Italian Social Movement. The worker and youth mobilization that defeated that hypothesis, paying the high price of 11 deaths, represents for us a model of how the labor movement can stop neo-fascism and a reactionary government.

1960 was a pivotal year. The economic growth of the fifties was at its peak, in '60 there was the all-time record with +8.3% GDP. Industry workers had recently overtaken those in agriculture. The "Italian miracle," however, built on the ruins of war with the sweat and blood of workers, had brought with it countless social contradictions that were beginning to result in growing union conflict. Fernando Tambroni was considered a "left-wing Christian Democrat" and had been tasked with forming a DC government in a climate of openness toward the Socialist Party, a climate that many representatives of the bourgeoisie and the Church bitterly opposed. This opening to the left however failed, to become its opposite: Tambroni was elected in April with MSI votes. Here we see how the same Christian Democrat political personnel were anti-fascist or pro-fascist according to necessity; the majority party was internally divided on the tactic to follow to get out of difficulties: co-responsibility with the left or an authoritarian turn?

The fascists immediately went "to collect" asking Tambroni to allow the MSI congress to take place in Genoa from July 2 to 4. The honorary presidency of the congress would be assigned to Carlo E. Basile who had been prefect of Genoa during the RSI, making himself responsible for the deportation to concentration camps of hundreds of striking workers. It was an intolerable provocation. Throughout June Genoa was mobilized to obtain the cancellation of the neo-fascist congress, as CGIL first requested, inviting workers to physically prevent its taking place. Left-wing, youth, cultural and union organizations carried out widespread propaganda, finding fertile ground in a strongly anti-fascist population that had in port workers its most combative part. There had also been in recent months several worker disputes that had exasperated the Genoese proletariat against the central and local government, last but not least the struggle of Ansaldo San Giorgio workers.

On June 25 a partisan commemorative march launched by FGCI and other left-wing youth organizations resulted in the first clashes with the Celere. On June 28 a Pertini rally further heated the climate. For June 30 CGIL had called an afternoon general strike, from which CISL and UIL dissociated themselves. The march had 100 thousand people: students and other young people ("the boys in striped shirts"), workers, former ANPI partisans. In De Ferrari square clashes broke out with police, who implemented fierce repression to which the people of Genoa responded with a real insurrection. The *camalli* who came up from the port, the people from the *caruggi* of the center gave support to the young people engaged in erecting barricades and defending themselves from police violence.

The Ligurian CGIL proclaimed another strike for July 2, while in the rest of the country mobilizations in solidarity with the Genoese revolt began; former partisans resumed contacts with each other, in Genoa and elsewhere insurrectional committees were formed. The MSI delegates arriving in Genoa found a hostile city under siege. Negotiations began to move the congress to Nervi, an option that PCI leaders would have been ready to accept but that CGIL, closer to worker pressures, refused. The negotiation failed and the congress was finally cancelled, despite protests from fascist leaders; CGIL immediately suspended the July 2 strike.

The result obtained in Genoa thanks to massive working class intervention however did not interrupt the mobilization, which at this point turned against Tambroni's entire authoritarian political operation. The government was put under pressure by MSI and the bourgeois press to restore order with an iron fist washing in blood the shame of having yielded to the Genoese square. On July 5 in Licata (AG) a strike in defense of employment was repressed in blood: police firing on the crowd killed 25-year-old Vincenzo Napoli. On July 6 in Rome an unauthorized anti-fascist demonstration was charged on horseback and even communist parliamentarians like Walter Audisio (Mussolini's executioner) were wounded.

For July 7 a strike was called in Reggio Emilia. 20 thousand people found themselves in the square where gatherings were prohibited, the only hall assigned to the demonstration had only 600 seats. Workers sang partisan songs under the monument to the Fallen when a violent charge of riot police and carabinieri started that quickly transformed into a massacre with firearms as soon as demonstrators organized the first barricades. Thus workers Lauro Farioli, Ovidio Franchi, Emilio Reverberi, Marino Serri, Afro Tondelli were killed, all PCI members (2 boys aged 19 and 22 and 3 former partisans).

The situation was getting out of hand: worker and partisan mobilization had increasingly broad consensus and was beginning to take on revolutionary characteristics. The government appealed for the suspension of all demonstrations and the leadership of PCI and CGIL, worried about the energies the working class was unleashing, showed themselves open to possibility. The bloody showdown however continued: on July 8 it was Palermo's turn where trade unionist Francesco Vella and young people Giuseppe Malleo and Andrea Gangitano whom Vella was helping were killed (Rosa La Barbera was also killed in her home by a stray bullet); the same day in Catania Salvatore Novembre, 19 years old, was bombarded with clubs and then finished off with close-range pistol shots.

The Italian republic "born from the Resistance" and "founded on work" had no problems using its armed wing to massacre partisans and workers in order to defend the established order. It wasn't the Constitution or democracy that stopped the blood, it was the force of the organized working class. Saturday July 9 the protest demonstrations for the eleven dead were imposing, especially in the cities of the massacres (100 thousand in Reggio): workers had not been frightened or bent.

Faced with the strength of the movement, which now openly set itself the goal of Tambroni's downfall, the ruling class began to divide. 61 Catholic intellectuals signed a document against DC's openings to the right. Tambroni was increasingly isolated, on July 19 he had to resign. Three days later Christian Democrat Amintore Fanfani received the mandate, who formed a government supported by PRI and PSDI.

The pendulum however was now moving toward an ever greater involvement of the left in government; the authoritarian option was impractical, but the bourgeoisie still needed to defend its interests in a context of growing class struggle like that of the sixties, so better to do it by flanking the faithful Christian Democracy with left-wing parties, starting with the most malleable: it would mean granting some modest reforms, obtaining in exchange greater stability. In 1962 a new Fanfani government obtained PSI abstention, which in 1963 entered the Moro government inaugurating the center-left formula (without PCI) that lasted until the mid-seventies, when the nefarious idea of a DC-PCI "historic compromise" emerged.

1960 for us is not the story of how the left forced the bourgeoisie to launch the center-left. That outcome, which saved a ruling class that found itself in great difficulty, actually represents a betrayal of the aspirations of those who rose up in Genoa or died in Emilia and Sicily with the hope of transforming society. Just see what happened to the executioners and victims. The former were all acquitted in subsequent trials, conversely, the protagonists of Genoese June 30 were persecuted for years, some of them forced to change city or even country, and often ended up in prison. The fascists, as is known, remained very active in the country, continuing their career as organizers of massacres and coups in service of the CIA and P2.

At the same time, the '60 movement prepared the ground for the revolutionary biennium 1968-'69, when once again Italian students and then workers tried to change the history of this country fighting against capitalism and its governments, whatever their color. It will happen again!

***

Published on [FalceMartello](https://web.archive.org/web/20170408164015/http://www.marxismo.net/content/view/3801/156/) n° 227.