---
layout: post
title: In memory of Valerio Evangelisti
tags: pol lit en
original: valerio-evangelisti-memory
---
After a great, bewildered sorrow, the first thought I had when I learned of **Valerio Evangelisti's** death was for the extraordinary and implausible community of friends, comrades, thinkers, readers, creatives, gamers, obsessives, assorted weirdos that has gathered around him over the years. These are the ones who called and will continue to call him "Magister" like his dark alter ego, the inquisitor Eymerich. I had the privilege of knowing him and knowing them, but in true Evangelisti spirit it was a cheap privilege, accessible to all: you just had to subscribe to the mailing list or go to a dinner or fan gathering, where often he was there too, thin, very tall and jovial, drinking and eating and laughing, talking about bullshit or great systems, studying the newcomers, as Alessandro Villari and I were many years ago the first time we met him, and he asked us questions and asked for our opinions. To this crazy group, and also to me, Valerio gave a sometimes decisive push to pursue improbable passions: reading, for everyone, writing, for many, but also drawing, directing films, writing screenplays, fencing, playing and listening to heavy metal, making games and video games, doing militant politics, and especially meeting each other. And from these meetings everything was born: friendships, collaborations, cohabitations or at least loves or at least at least some sex, furious quarrels, binges and various pregnancies.

In the eclectic organization of my library, instead of distributing Valerio's books among the areas dedicated to various categories of fiction and non-fiction, fantastic and historical-political, I've assigned him a shelf all his own. In fact, he's the only author of whom I own so many volumes and who ranges over such disparate themes: the long saga of Nicolas Eymerich, naturally, which talks about the fourteenth-century Europe and practically every other era and place, but also the development of modern Mexico, the history of American syndicalism and communism, the birth of the Italian labor movement up to the Resistance struggle, Caribbean piracy, Risorgimento struggles, the dark future that awaits us if the most reactionary and dystopian tendencies of capitalism prevail... and much more. Valerio's imagination was volcanic, his interests boundless, ardent his passion in reading novels, stories, essays, comics, articles and in watching films, little films, bad films (especially bad films), TV series or TV shows, cartoons and in reworking and reinventing all this imagery in his multiple worlds, in his tentacular and interconnected sagas.

Once I called "mass paranormal" a characteristic that recurs in Evangelisti's literature: the breaking of the order of the physical world operated by a cultural superstructure shared among a mass of women and men; what happens that is magical, impossible in those stories of his that belong to the fantastic genre is the fruit of a collective imagination that acquires the force of a material reality. But the same, come to think of it, happens in his historical novels and even... in his essays. Ideas that take hold of a mass and move it, better, ideas that a human mass develops in the clash between its needs and its sufferings, become a material force, and change the world almost magically. The ideas of the people are the enchantment of the world.

Valerio was a communist and a revolutionary. It's worth reaffirming, at the risk of pleonasm, both concepts, to avoid misunderstandings. He wasn't a communist "in his heart," "in symbols," but really a comrade concretely convinced that capitalism one day, perhaps not even too far away, could end and be intelligently replaced with a more human system in which, as he said, "the working class must direct everything." And he wasn't a revolutionary "by nature," "cultural," but really a comrade who asked himself the precise way in which the transformation of today's society into that other one should be organized, who studied how the assault of proletarians on heaven had been attempted and had failed a thousand times. And I believe there isn't a book among the dozens he published in which this theme isn't inextricably intertwined with that of the oldest and most bloody and intolerable contradiction: the cruel oppression of women through the centuries. These aspects must be remembered because if in future literature books Valerio will be, as I believe, canonized as a great genre novelist of the late twentieth century and early two thousands, they will surely try to downsize his political idea to one of the many sources of inspiration of his polyhedral spirit, which it certainly was but which would be unfair to trivialize. Evangelisti was a Marxist and all his work is imbued with the conception that class struggle is what shapes history, both great history and small individual and family stories, especially of workers and peasant women and unemployed and poor people, which overflow in his books. And if you don't like it, figure it out yourselves, he would perhaps say with that grin of his that we'll miss.

He had been ill for some time, he had even talked about it in an autobiographical booklet. However, friends who frequented him more told me he seemed better, and I really didn't think he would die like this. I had gotten the idea that he would be sickly for decades and would die very annoyed at exactly one hundred years old. He left so much that it's as if he had lived those hundred years anyway, but it's an unpleasant pain, with nothing solemn and consoling about it, to know he's no longer here. If his conception of the world has any sense, it's now up to us survivors to ensure that that collective imagination he sculpted in life continues to move the world.