---
layout: post
title: "Zuckerberg fires 11 thousand workers"
tags: geek pol en
original: zuckerberg-layoffs
---
On November 9, Mark Zuckerberg, president and CEO of Meta, the company that owns Facebook, WhatsApp and Instagram, announced with an open letter the layoff of 11 thousand employees. "There's no right way to do a layoff," he apologized. "I know this is especially difficult if you're here on an immigration visa," he added. But even billionaires have a heart: "We've decided to remove access to most Meta systems for those leaving today, given the amount of sensitive data they could access. But we'll keep email addresses active throughout the day so everyone can say goodbye."

The explanation given by Zuckerberg is that at the beginning of the pandemic he had deluded himself that the "feast" would continue, but the growth in online purchases and physical isolation didn't maintain itself in 2022. However much it may displease the masters of social networks, but also some prophets of doom who abounded even on the left in 2020-2021, in-person interaction and life outside the home will continue to exist for a long time.

Actually, another obsession of the billionaire founder of Facebook is probably an important contributing cause of the million-dollar losses recorded by Meta: [the elusive Metaverse]({% post_url 2022-09-13-miserie-del-metaverso%}). Investments in this technology, whose strategic importance for Meta Zuckerberg has reaffirmed, have been huge (in 2022 Meta's department that deals with it has already lost 9.4 billion dollars) but haven't brought results.

Virtual reality (VR), which doesn't coincide with the Metaverse, is a technology used for various purposes like teaching, science, design and especially entertainment, but is still niche: the best VR video games, which drive this subsector, sell a hundred or thousand times less than major non-VR titles. Zuckerberg's vision is that VR will become mainstream because millions of people will want to use it daily to meet precisely "in the Metaverse," that is, in simulated 3D environments used to work, study and spend their free time. Probably nothing like that will happen; but this mirage expresses the urgency Meta has to hook its business to physical objects. Meta is in fact the main producer of VR headsets: it sells the Oculus Quest, now renamed Meta Quest. Establishing itself as the Metaverse would allow it to monopolize a golden goose on all levels: hardware, software, user base and content. In an internal memo, however, Vishal Shah, the Meta executive in charge of developing the Metaverse, complained that his own employees don't like using the product for their meetings.

This way Zuckerberg thinks to escape the problem of declining online advertising returns, on which the business model of all mass social media including Twitter, TikTok or Google products still depends. Advertising however produces nothing: it can only redistribute value created elsewhere by human labor; also for this reason the digital economy is strictly connected to traditional sectors and particularly to industry performance. Another capricious billionaire, Elon Musk, bought Twitter and immediately fired half the workforce. In a closed-door meeting with employees, whose contents leaked, he explained the situation this way: "The reason I have very high urgency on subscriptions is that we're heading into, I think, a pretty severe recession. And you see how virtually every company is laying off; it's not just Twitter. And in a recession, advertising gets hit disproportionately."

It doesn't even concern just social media; almost all the giants of computing and e-commerce are laying off: Microsoft, Google, Amazon, payment service Stripe, graphics engine Unity, not to mention the [catastrophic situation in the cryptocurrency sector]({% post_url 2022-12-02-crisi-delle-criptovalute%}). Immense speculative bubbles, reckless investments in improbable projects, castles of bytes built on hypothetical businesses are all going up in smoke cutting the legs out from under what in recent years has been one of the main outlets for excess capital that could no longer find profitable investments in traditional sectors of the economy. The increase in interest rates, raising the bar of margin required to keep a profitable business going, is implementing and will implement a drastic pruning.

The conditions of these workers were quite good, and many of them received a significant severance package; one could therefore object that their condition doesn't concern the working class. Yet, this is precisely how the proletarianization of these sectors occurs: with the destruction of the most prized jobs. The conditions of those who deal with software become increasingly similar to those of other office workers, their unionization increases and in the USA this could lead them to link up with the rebirth of a combative union movement: another element to consider in the impending social storm.

***

This article was published on [Rivoluzione n° 93](https://www.rivoluzione.red/rivoluzione-n-93/).